---
title: Foundational assumptions
macrolib: topos
---

**Definition.** A *meta-category* $\mathfrak{C}$ is defined by explaining what
an object of $\mathfrak{E}$ is, and, given two objects $x,y\in \mathfrak{E}$,
what a morphism from $x$ to $y$ is, together with the following operations:

1. for each object $x\in \mathfrak{E}$, an *identity* map $\Idn{x} : x \to x$,
2. for any two maps $f:x\to y$ and $g:y\to z$, a *composite map* $f;g : x \to z$,
3. such that the following equations hold:
\\[
  \Idn{x};h = h\qquad
  h;\Idn{y} = h\qquad
  f;(g;h) = (f;g);{h}
\\]


In our explanation above, we have not imposed any restrictions on what kinds of
things the objects and morphisms are; our definition is pre-mathematical, so we
do not assume beforehand that there is a such thing as a collection of "all"
meta-categories.

**Remark.** We may define analogous notions of meta-functor, etc. But we do not
assume that the notion of "all meta-functors $\mathfrak{C}\to\mathfrak{D}$" is
well-defined; the notion is entirely schematic.


**Assumption.** We assume a meta-category $\BoldSymbol{\mathfrak{Coll}}$ whose
objects we will refer to as "collections". We assume that the meta-category of all collections satisfies the axioms of Lawvere's [ETCS](http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/ETCS).

**Definition.** A *category* $E$ is defined to be a meta-category whose objects
are defined to be the elements of some collection, and for any two objects
$x,y\in E$ the morphisms $x\to y$ are defined to be an element of some
collection.

Consequently there exists a meta-category $\BoldSymbol{\mathfrak{Cat}}$ of all
categories. Following [Lawvere](http://rfcwalters.blogspot.com/2010/10/old-post-why-are-we-concerned-fw.html) (but deviating from some other authors that
ground the notion of meta-categories in *classes*) we assert that
$\BoldSymbol{\mathfrak{Cat}}$ is cartesian closed; in other words, all functor
categories exist regardless of size.

**Assumption.** At times we may assume that there exists a *category*
$\SET\subseteq\BoldSymbol{\mathfrak{Coll}}$ of collections that we will refer
to as sets, such that $\SET$ is closed under the axioms of
[ETCS](https://ncatlab.org/show/ETCS). Rather than work with $\SET$ at all
times, our approach is to use the tools of relative category theory to
objectify the notions of "small" and "locally small" category over any category
$B$, generalizing the role of $\SET$ from classical category theory.
